# On the open design of tangible goods

## Open source beyond sw

In the scholarly literature, OSS is identified as anexample of a ‘new innovation model’ beyondmarkets, hierarchies, and strategic alliances (Os-terloh and Rota, 2007) that has also been referredto as the ‘community-based model’ (Shah, 2005),the ‘open source method’ (Osterloh and Rota,2007), or ‘opensourcing’ (Agerfalk and Fitzger-ald, 2008). Open source development is an exam-ple of the private-collective model (von Hippeland von Krogh, 2003) and one form of opentechnology (Nuvolari and Rullani, 2007).

To gen-eralise the ‘OS model’ to a non-industry-specificlevel, we propose the following model, which wecall Open Source Innovation (OSI): OSI is char-acterised by free revealing of information on anew design with the intention of collaborativedevelopment of a single design or a limitednumber of related designs for market or non-market exploitation.

This definition includes four critical aspects: 

(1) OSI is characterised by a non-market, non-contractual transfer of knowledge among theactors involved in invention and between thoseactors and those involved in exploitation. Actorsshare some ideas, designs, and other relevantinformation with a non-definite set of other actorswithout any immediate recompense or expecta-tion thereof. An open licence may establish rulesof knowledge sharing and re-usage.

(2) Actors share  their ideas with  the clear  purpose  ofcontributing to the joint development of 

(3) a single, integrated design or a number of interrelated designs. Put reversely, OSI does not referto design information being revealed by actorswithout the understanding that this design is apart of a larger design task carried out in acollaborative fashion by a group of actors. 

(4) The design thus developed is exploited in thesense that it is produced and sold on a market,integrated into other products that are marketed,deployed during the development of such pro-ducts or used for any other private or commercialpurpose

Our model builds on and intersects with severalof the models of collaborative development pro-posed in the literature (cf. Raasch et al., 2008).The theoretical foundation supporting OSI is laidby the private-collective model (von Hippel andvon Krogh, 2003, 2006), whereby actors investprivate resources towards the production of apublic good. Within this model, OSI focuses ona collaborative development process involvingseveral contributing actors and therefore requir-ing organisational mechanisms to co-ordinate theefforts expended by different actors.

OSI also needs to be related to user innovationnetworks or communities (von Hippel, 2005, 2007;Fu ̈ller et al., 2007). The user-innovation model isbased on ‘open, voluntary, and collaborative ef-forts of users’ (Shah, 2005, p. 1), meaning privateor commercial, but still users. Similarly, OSI canbe generated by commercial or private contribu-tors or a mixture of both. Contributors to OSI,however, need not be users. Commercial contribu-tors, for instance, may profit from an increase insales of complementary products or the creation ofa standard (Henkel, 2006). Moreover OSI refers tocollaborative development efforts on behalf of anintegrated design, a condition that does not neces-sarily hold for user communities (Lu ̈thje et al.,2005).

The term open design(Vallanceet al., 2001), describes open hardware as well asotherphysicalobjects being developed in accor-dance with the OSI model. While much of thedevelopment work can be accomplished virtually,the ultimate purpose is the design and productionof a physical artefact. Not least due to the successof OSS, open design is enjoying an upsurge(Hope, 2003). Mostly unheeded by scholarlyresearch, a multitude of open design projectshas constituted itself since approximately 2005,ranging from bicycles to microchips and fromMP3 players to manufacturing equipment. Whilemost of these projects are still in development,others have had marketed products for severalyears

**Case study methodology**     
Case-study research is generally chosen when‘why’ or ‘how’ questions are being posed oncurrent  events  over  which  the  investigatorhas little control (Yin, 2003). 
Particularly suited to research into new topics with thepurpose of advancing theory (Eisenhardt, 1989;Gillham, 2000). Multiple case analysis is gene-rally regarded as being more robust than singlecase studies (Herriott and Firestone, 1983; Yin,2003).

At this early stage of research on theopen design phenomenon, an encompassing viewseemed advantageous. As recommended by Petti-grew (1988), we therefore selected cases to ‘filltheoretical categories and provide examples ofpolar types’ (Eisenhardt, 1989, p. 537). 
For each cate-gory we strove to have at least two cases in orderto allow findings to be replicated (Yin, 2003). 

We then drew on our pool of projects to selectcases for in-depth analysis, pursuing a multi-stagefiltering process to optimise for these criteria.Purposeful sampling of information-rich caseswas chosen as the most appropriate approach.In particular, we sought to mirror the diversity ofprojects found in our case pool by selectingmutually dissimilar projects.

During data collection for each case, we usedmultiple sources of evidence: first, documentations and archives written by the developer com-munities themselves or other authors were studiedextensively. 
Second, we observed each communityover a 10-week period, reading and triggeringmailing list discussions, chat conversations, andforum entries. 
Third, 3–6 in-depth expert inter-views per case were conducted (cf. Appendix)using  a  semi-structured  interview  guideline.

For triangulation, we compiled and then com-pared the information gathered during differentinterviews on the same case as well as a largeamount of secondary data (Yin, 2003). The re-maining questions or incongruities were addressedto our interview partners for clarification. Finally,the case-study results were reviewed by some of ourexpert interviewees.

## The transition from digital to physicalspace

In our case studies, we identify three different loci ofproduction: with external manufacturers, with thecommunity, or with the focal organisation coordi-nating the project.

As these quotations illustrate, there is no clear-cutseparation between design, prototyping, and pro-duction in the community production regimeemployed be RepRap, at least not at this stage.Once the design is finalised, the option of invol-ving an external manufacturer for mass produc-tion may be considered – although this does notappear to be a likely avenue at present.
