# The appropriate technology movement in Latin America

Originating in debates about developing countries and development assistance in the 1960s, and remaining identifiable as a broadly coherent movement until the 1980s, appropriate technology practitioners sought to redefine technology as a tool for development. Actors and institutions that were part of the appropriate technology (AT) movement were varied. 

The umbrella term ‘appropriate technology’ involved, broadly speaking, a set of common characteristics that attempted to shape technologies for development: low in capital cost; reliant on local materials; job-creating, employing local skills and labour; small enough in scale to be affordable for small groups; understood, controlled and maintained by local people wherever possible, without requiring a high level of Western-style education; involving some forms of collective use and collaboration; avoiding patents and property rights, etc. (Darrow & Pam, 1978). In essence, proponents of appropriate technology sought a more situated, environmentally concerned and socially just set of design and operational principles for diverse technology choices by involving local communities (Kaplinksy, 1990; Willoughby, 1990).

Appropriate technology was a reaction against wholly blueprint developments involving imported Western technologies, whose industrial contexts were ill-suited to the poor, and ended up lying idle for lack of supportive supplies, infrastructure, and relevant skills.

An important inspiration for practitioners in the appropriate technology movement was the economist Fritz Schumacher, who founded the Intermediate Technology Development Group with colleagues in 1966 in England (ITDG)1 (Willoughby, 1990) and wrote the influential book “Small is Beautiful” (Schumacher, 1973). Schumacher’s views, along with related arguments by Ivan Illich (Illich, 1973), the Dag Hamaarskjöld Foundation (Dag Hamaarskjöld Foundation, 1975), and others, resonated with the frustrations many development workers in the field had with post-WWII industrialisation blueprints through North-South technology transfer (Rist, 2011). 

As the notion of appropriate technology gained recognition (between the 1970s and early 1980s), international institutions like the Inter-American Bank of Development, The World Bank, the UN Environmental Programme, the International Labour Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization, World Health Organization, the OECD, and UNIDO established departments of appropriate technologies. Over this period, the plethora of programmes, projects and interests supporting The World of Appropriate Technology (as the OECD reported in 1982) were substantial (Jéquier, 1982).

AT ideas became more prominent in South America during the late 1970s and early 1980s, a moment of dramatic social changes including political upheaval and repression, dictatorship and social demobilization. It was also a moment when the idea of development and the role of the state started to be questioned as endogenous industrialization (under the state-led Import Substitution model) and social services infrastructure were slowed or even halted in some countries. Furthermore, most South American countries were affected by a “debt crisis” that provoked economic restructuring and gave way to what was regarded as the “lost decade” of the region.

Nevertheless, in South America, the appropriate technology vision of self-reliant economic activity through technological autonomy resonated well with practitioners, NGOs and some scientists and S&T scholars. But it also attracted suspicion, as it smacked of ‘second-class’ development for some elites (including scientific communities) (Dickson, 1974) and a technologically deterministic theory of development (See Willoughby, 1990), which suggested that if the right kind of tools could be developed, then more egalitarian economic and social development would automatically flourish. 

## Latin american context
Formal S&T policy in Latin America in the 1950s and 60s was motivated by the view of S&T as an engine of growth, and a desire for modernization and development, as well as a nationalistic response to recommendations by international institutions, such as UNESCO (Dagnino & Thomas, 1999). Influenced by the USA’s post-WWII science policy (Bush, 1945), many of the national science and technology research councils were established or consolidated in this period in ways that followed a linear model of science pushing development forwards (Albornoz, 2001a). This supply-focused approach gave limited attention to links with productive sectors (Dagnino & Thomas, 1999; Herrera, 1973; Vessuri, 2003). At the same time, research funded by international aid focused mostly on imported technical fixes, not on building longer-term technological or innovative capabilities (Herrera, 1973; Vessuri, 2003)

Highly influenced by Latin American structural dependency theorists, regional science policy researchers began to question the prevalent model of a science and technology gap to be ‘filled’ with more resources, training and planning. Instead they asked for a more structural analysis of S&T and called for building domestic capabilities that were more relevant for the region, and connected with production needs, rather than following international scientific scholarship (Herrera 1973)

In this context, researchers and practitioners of the so-called ‘Latin American School of Thought on Science, Technology and Development’ emphasised technological autonomy, and local and endogenous technological development as a way to foster an integrated development process attentive to broader sectorial and national policies (Vidal and Mari 2002). Members of this school of thought were particularly interested in linking S&T with the basic needs of socially and economically marginalized groups.

They criticised existing R&D systems for being severely disconnected from social realities in Latin America at the time, and for failing to draw on domestic capabilities, while also calling attention to environmental concerns (Herrera 1973). Amílcar Herrera and Oscar Varsavsky in particular called for a science that was ‘committed’ to addressing pervasive social inequalities.1 Herrera was an early supporter of AT ideas and became an influence for some AT practitioners. However, despite this theorizing effort, mainstream research communities remained distanced from social needs (Dagnino and Thomas 1999). 

Periods of relative political openness allowed social and political activists to come back from long exiles in foreign countries. As they returned, so they brought back new ideas and experience about technology and politics picked up in exile, which combined with regional ideas that had been repressed during the period of dictatorships. They were able to attract support from international aid organizations that during the 1980s were keen to shore up development and educational programmes in the region, and which had AT departments interested in similar ideas. In this context of relative openness - between the end of the 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s - and increasing expectations about democracy, many AT centres were created in the region. As such, AT developments in the region were forged between regional demands for greater political and economic autonomy – visible in different ways in the dependency school, peasant and student movements – and Northern concepts, imported through international institutions, networks and influences, and which required translation to local opportunities, problems and demands.

Almost every South American country had some AT activity during this period and it is possible to trace AT centres and programmes in Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Venezuela and Uruguay (see table 1). Apart from a few exceptions (most notably in Brazil) AT centres in the region were autonomous institutions, with a NGO-like status that depended on external funding to carry on their activities. These centres included engineers, economists, sociologists and social workers; in some cases they also included the work of volunteers and students, and had a few links with academic institutions. Importantly, some of the regional social actors and centres of AT were connected to the global AT movement, and acted as a relay between regional developments and international opportunities. 

## Framings for AT in Latin America
AT ideas did not exactly fit the complex reality of South America in the 1980s: one of the first tasks for AT centres was to translate and re-frame AT ideas into terms relevant to local problems, actors and situations. 

1- Development intervention: design of technologies for the resolution of immediate needs of the poorest population, in response to a sense of failure in attempts at technology transfer projects, which ignored local knowledge, needs and constraints

2- Changing social and political consciousness: based on a critique of environmental and social problems associated with mass-industrialization, the need to find new forms of mobilization, resistance and empowerment in popular sectors

3- From top-down strategies to increasing participation: practitioners also strove to experiment with social participation, enabling communities to define their problems and experiment with their own solutions.
This feature should not be surprising, since ideas about popular education and participatory methodologies were strong in the region due to the influence of authors like Paulo Freire and Orlando Fals Borda1 that helped to shape new approaches participation (Kaimowitz, 1993). Thus AT often included sociologists and social workers as part of their team. They also devised several methodologies that pointed to (certain process) of co-design of technologies, a series of feedback loops of information gathering that allowed participants to monitor the work of technologies, and also leading to self-organization and construction by users of technologies. 

The process of learning how to do AT in Latin America became intrinsically related with social participation in the processes of technology development. Furthermore, as practitioners assigned other meanings to AT like political resistance to the dictatorship, autonomy or solidarity, so the idea of participation took on deeper and stronger significance. By doing so, the range of practitioners in South America was widened and stretched their own technical rationality (Schon, 1983) to include popular participation and appropriation as a core activity of technological development. Furthermore, they attempted to translated the AT method into a more political platform of social experimentation and transformation. 

unding institutions did not always understand the extension of this approach. Large international organizations sometimes pushed for a more industrial-focused vision of AT, even questioning the “alternative movement” as limiting opportunities and interest of national governments because they were associated with the “off-beat”, “counter-culture” movement (Reddy, 1979)1. Inthe case of South America, the main difficulty in dealing with funding institutions was pressures to scale up experiences, a process that could undermine public participation schemes (Serrano, 2014).

what characterized the AT movement in South America was not the latter but the effort to devise a distinctive, participatory approach that used technology as a tool for autonomy and empowerment.

4- Traditional knowledge and indigenous communities
In Latin America, and especially in the Andean region, this process of adaptation meant addressing the needs and traditions of indigenous communities like the Mapuches in Chile or the Quechuas in Perú. 

By bringing indigenous knowledge into AT workshops, groups of engineers and practitioners attempted to systematize local knowledge, providing it with a certain scientific base. Much of the work of retrieval involved the collection and study of botanical and agricultural knowledge from indigenous communities. They were in that sense, aligned with another framing close to AT groups in Latin America: agroecology and sustainable development.

One of the more radical approaches was that of Grupo Talpuy in Peru which started as a traditional AT group offering off-the-shelf technology but which rapidly realized the need to adapt its technologies and communication strategies to the indigenous population through its bilingual (Spanish and Quechua) magazine Minka.
for Minka editors it was not only a matter of modernizing indigenous knowledge but also, as the subtitle of the Minka affirmed, they aimed at building “authentic indigenous science”. For the rest of the AT centres however, the process or retrieving local knowledge was associated with "scientific validation" in more formal settings like universities and R&D institutions. 

5- Environmental Crisis and Alternative Development

Latin American scientists like the eco-economist Ignacy Sachs in Brazil and the agroecologist Miguel Altieri from Uruguay were important influences in the design of strategies for, respectively, low cost and no-waste technologies and organic agriculture (Kaimowitz, 1993).

At the macro level, concerns about the social and environmental effects of the Green Revolution and big agriculture pointed to the need to develop alternative, more sustainable methods suitable for small farming.

On the micro level, there were concerns about the marginalization of the rural population in national development agendas, the increased process of acculturation that resulted from industrialization of the rural space, and the loss of traditional practices. 
Agroecological knowledge, complemented with the task of retrieving indigenous technologies and farming practices, provided AT centres with a programme to foster autonomy and self-economic reliance.

One of the challenges of AT practitioners in South America was to translate global ideas about alternative development into a complex reality involving several political scenarios. In doing so, they inevitably drew from local ideas and debates around the region like popular education, participatory action research, emerging agroecological ideas and the relevance of indigenous knowledge. 
More focused in concrete action than in ideology, the process of framing was therefore flexible and reflected in part the learning process in the field. 

formal scientific institutions provided limited support for AT activities in South America. There was significant support in some instances, as in the case of Gaviotas in Colombia, or in Brazil. However, this support was not widespread and was limited to particular institutions where practitioners and sympathizers pushed academic institutions to provide some kind of technical support and funding. 
Only in the case of agroecology did interest from academia increase over time. However, for other technologies that relied on mature technologies, the interest of scholars never surpassed small collaborations. Even in those cases where there was a more or less steady institutional support – like the CNPq programme in 1980s or the case of CEVE in Argentina – AT was still seen by scientific elites as marginal in relation to scientific knowledge (see Brandão, 2001). 

### Global decline and transformation of AT ideas

During the 1980s the favourable context for the AT movement began to change internationally. As neoliberal policies pioneered in Chile began to unravel, in the USA, UK and other countries, ideas of “structural adjustment” hit development agencies (Rist, 2011). 

The lack of interest in AT internationally inevitably affected AT experiences in South America, where international aid was a big support. However, this did not immediately stop the AT movement as centres in the region remained and even grew during this period. AT centres took advantage of shifts in international cooperation that sought to support the democratization process in region, working in the space of rural development and largely against the current of intensive industrial agriculture.

The decline of AT in Europe during the mid 1980s seems to have pushed not so much the demise of AT in South America as the beginning of the end of its social movement. The 1990s was perhaps the moment where existing connections and projects started to dwindle. To make matters worse, during the 1990s South American countries increasingly adopted the dominant neo-liberalism and applied it towards S&T, and sought to establish productive links between research and industry, through technology transfer and other means oriented towards international export, rather than local socio-economic problems (Thomas, Davyt, & Dagnino, 2000). This approach was exactly the opposite to the goals of participation and inclusion proposed by AT practitioners. 

Only agroecology stood out among the other technologies since it was especially suited for the rural spaces and provided AT centres with a tractable and easily understood set of techniques which produced immediate results for those in need.
Agroecology was different to the rest of the AT technologies available since it was already connected with local knowledge and ancient practices and was easily linked with the needs and interest of peasants and small farmers. It also provided an opportunity to enrich this knowledge with scientific ideas and methods. Moreover, it was a set of technologies that were clearly opposed to the practices and methods of agribusiness (Wezel et al., 2009). These elements created a niche where agroecological techniques were developed both in the field and in the academia (although it generally remained marginal in universities and R&D institutions).

As the AT movement dwindled in the region, the newly formed agroecological networks like CLADE, MAELA and RAP-AL pick up the baton of grassroots innovation. These networks shared a lot of connections and were sometimes formed by the same practitioners from AT centres. In this way, agroecology helped to carry on some of the ideas, technologies and frames of AT.

Suited for small scale and do-it-yourself, AT technologies become a fertile ground for participatory experiments and designs which attempted to include beneficiaries in several stages of technological development. 

The importance attributed to participation and empowerment is central to understand the effort of some AT institutions in Latin America. As AT practitioners realized the difficulties and structural modification that the new political scenario of economic crisis posed, they turned to build immediate solutions to poverty and exclusion. They did this by developing artefacts, techniques and material practices in order to replace former ways of political action.  Translating old political ideas about mobilization into the technical clothes of AT as also part of a new strategy that sought to promote autonomy from the State. In this way, hidden beneath the social work and technological solution laid an attempt to recreate forms of political conscience and participatory activism and the use of technology as a mean to empower citizens. Ideas about participatory research and technological autonomy and were latter taken by other social movements, most notably the Social Technology Network in Brazil at the beginning of the 21st century1. 

## Conclusions
With few exceptions, the AT movement arrived at South America at the beginning of the 1980s in the midst of turbulent times characterized by political repression, economic adjustment and the crisis of the foreign debt. Internationally, AT was already passing its peak of interest and the decline of the movement was close due to the new wave of neoliberalism (Kaplinksy, 1990). And yet, in South America, AT practitioners found a fertile ground to develop technologies and new approaches suited for the harsh realities of the region. Even swimming against the current, the AT movement in South America was a vibrant and bold social experiment that thrived in some rural settings and was replicated in different countries. Two elements of this history are particularly interesting contributions for ideas about the construction of alternative pathways of development and might bear lessons for other grassroots innovation movements.

First, in many contexts, AT practitioners experimented with participatory methods and created their own approach to technological design. They did so by drawing from regional intellectual influences like Paulo Freire and Orlando Fals Borda and a history of social and political mobilisation. They also took on the difficult task of combining local and indigenous knowledge with scientific principles. Thus, the AT movement in South America devised a participatory approach where technology became an instrument to foster social empowerment, create solidarity bonds and strengthen local identities. Interestingly, the participatory approach was almost forgotten after the movement started to lose momentum, and the image that remained of the movement regarding technology design was that left behind in handbooks that gave the impression of, and criticisms that focused attention on, AT as technological fix. 

Undoubtedly, some of this fixation with technology was present - and with the social movement gone this has probably worsened today. And yet, when the Social Technology Network retook some of the ideas, frames and technologies of AT in Brazil, an inclination toward technology fixes was not a real concern.

As a result, the AT movement in the region (and worldwide) was able to give impetus to ideas about technology whose subsequently quiet, often hidden influence over the years is visible in sustainable innovations today. Moreover, processes for public participation and the inclusion of local knowledge, made so apparent by appropriate technology principles, have become common practice in development projects (Chambers, 1997; Pieterse, 1998), subsequently subjected to its own associated critiques (Cooke & Kothari, 2001; Hickey & Mohan, 2004).

So whilst appropriate technology as a category slipped away from the development agenda, the movement practitioners, fieldworkers, and development professionals dispersed into multiple new development debates, agendas and currents of funding. Development practitioners and fieldworker attention had to re-orient to this new context. And yet some of them remained engaged in different activities that planted the seed for current grassroots innovation efforts. In this way, well beyond technologies, both participatory methods and the new networks and ideas that sprang from the AT movement are perhaps its most important legacy in South America. 

 
