# The CERN Open Hardware Licence

It all started with the White Rabbit. Not any White Rabbit – a timing system initially developedfor experimental physics facilities able to synchronize ~1000 nodes with sub-nanosecond accuracyover fibre lengths of up to 10km. And with an idea, a realisation, that hardware development neednot   be   done   in   isolation,   by   a   group   of   persons   or   entities   with   relatively   long-standing   orestablished relationships, but may instead gather contributions ranging from the single individualdesigner sitting in his basement to whole design teams from large organizations. Such cooperativedevelopment would have the double benefit of avoiding duplication of efforts while capitalising onthe know-how, expertise, and ideas of dozens of contributors. Thus was born the Open HardwareRepository1  (OHR). The second step to be taken to consolidate the envisaged scheme was todefine   the   rules   for   sharing   and   distributing   the   designs   placed   on   the   OHR,   and   while   thegoodwill of contributors was driving the effort, it was also felt that a legal framework was to beput in place for contributions made by CERN to the OHR. Javier, the initiator and driver of thiseffort,   contacted   the   Knowledge   Transfer   Group   (KT)   at   CERN   with   well-defined   ideas   –collaborative   development   done   in   an   open   source   manner   –   and   a   request   for   support   –implementing this open source approach for electronics designs. KT indeed has the mission tooptimise   the   impact   CERN   has   on   society,   through,   in   particular,   the   dissemination   of   itstechnologies and know-how. In this regard, one of the goals underlying the framework was beingable to track dissemination of the CERN electronics designs while ensuring recognition.

## Persistance
Could   a   copyleft   licence   discourage   companies   from   manufacturing   andcommercialising open hardware? Consultation with a few potential manufacturers of productsbased on documentation licensed as open hardware indicated that they were willing to engage withthis   scheme.   Furthermore,   should   companies   not   wish   to   use   copylefted   documentation   formanufacturing products, they could always approach the licensor(s) to request different conditions.Dual licensing could be an option – even though in practice only achievable in the event thenumber of licensors concerned is limited (except where elements of the design are licensed undervery liberal, academic-style licences).

## Recognition
it is important for CERN that it is able to demonstrate its impact on society, andthe extent of dissemination of its work and technologies is one type of information helping achievethis goal. Thus, receiving information on the number of products manufactured using CERN openhardware documentation appeared on the wish list of elements to include in the licence agreement.

he purpose was not to obtain sensitive dataor impose reporting obligations. It was also rapidly pointed out that this could not be formulated asa hard requirement or it would fail the 'desert island' test. What remains is hence an invitation formanufacturers to inform the licensors having expressed interest in receiving this information aboutthe   type,   quantity,   and   dates   of   production   of   products   based   on   the   documentation.  Therequirement to maintain all copyright notices on the documentation fulfils its wish to ensure theproper acknowledgement of its contribution

 The CERN OHL applies to the documentation only and does not purportto cover accompanying software. It does however extend to patents held by the licensor whichmay   be   necessary   to   make   use   of   the   documentation.   The   rights   granted   under   this   licenceagreement relate to the documentation itself, and to the manufacture of products based thereon
